   Copyright (C) 1990, 1995, 1996, 1997 Aladdin Enterprises.  All rights reserved.
  
  This file is part of Aladdin Ghostscript.
  
  Aladdin Ghostscript is distributed with NO WARRANTY OF ANY KIND.  No author
  or distributor accepts any responsibility for the consequences of using it,
  or for whether it serves any particular purpose or works at all, unless he
  or she says so in writing.  Refer to the Aladdin Ghostscript Free Public
  License (the "License") for full details.
  
  Every copy of Aladdin Ghostscript must include a copy of the License,
  normally in a plain ASCII text file named PUBLIC.  The License grants you
  the right to copy, modify and redistribute Aladdin Ghostscript, but only
  under certain conditions described in the License.  Among other things, the
  License requires that the copyright notice and this notice be preserved on
  all copies.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

This file, current.txt, describes problems and new features in the current
release of Ghostscript.  This file describes version 5.0 of Ghostscript.

For an overview of Ghostscript and a list of the documentation files, see
README.

New features (since release 4.03)
============

(This is not a complete list of new features: see NEWS for details.)

PDF 1.2 (the file format from Acrobat 3.0) is now supported, except for Type
0 (Japanese/Chinese/Korean) embedded fonts.  NOTE: This requires an updated
version of the decryption patch.  See pdf_sec.ps for details.

Local VM garbage collection (1 vmreclaim) is now implemented.

CIDFonts and CMap-keyed composite fonts are now supported, except that
rearranged fonts, and CMap-keyed composite fonts whose descendant fonts are
themselves composite, are not implemented.

PDF compressed fonts (CFF) are now supported, except that Multiple Master
fonts and CID fonts are not yet implemented in this format.

The FontResourceDir, GenericResourceDir, and GenericResourcePathSep system
parameters, and ResourceFileName for the built-in resource categories, are
now supported, for Adobe-compatible accessing of file-based resources.

Building with GNU make on OpenVMS is now supported.  (We will probably drop
the DCL scripts in the next release.)

If you include the optional epsf.dev feature at compile time, the
interpreter will recognize and handle MS-DOS EPSF files with a binary header
(by skipping the header and only processing the PostScript part).

The fileset now contains (but doesn't normally use) gcc-compatible floating
point emulation code, for use on systems that don't have floating point
hardware.

RAM- rather than file-based band lists, normally using deflate (zlib)
compression, are now supported.

The PDF writer now recognizes all Distiller 3.0 parameters, although most of
them don't have any effect.

The pstoppm.ps script has been removed, since the p*m drivers supersede it.

New drivers:
    Displays:
	ali - SuperVGA displays using the Avance Logic chipset
    Printers:
	lp8000 - Epson LP-8000 laser printer
	pxlmono - Black-and-white PCL XL (LaserJet 5 & 6)
	pxlcolor - Color PCL XL (future color LaserJets)
	uniprint - A new driver for many color inkjets, see devices.txt
    Raster file formats:
	jpeg - JPEG (.jpg) files
	pcxcmyk - 4-bit PCX using CMYK color
	psgray - 8-bit gray PostScript (Level 1) bitmap images
    High-level file formats:
	epswrite - High-level EPS "distiller"
	pswrite - High-level PostScript "distiller"

Changes
=======

There have been no significant user-visible changes.

Known problems
==============

(This is not a complete list of known problems: see NEWS for details.)

Usage
-----

On a MS-DOS system, interrupting the interpreter by typing ^C doesn't
restore the display mode.

Limitations
-----------

serialnumber returns the same value in all copies.

User names (a Display PostScript facility) are not implemented.

Some floating point exceptions terminate the interpreter, rather than
producing a limitcheck error.

The DCTEncode filter disregards the Blend parameter, and uses different
QuantTables and HuffTables from Adobe's.

The DCT filters do not support nonintegral sample ratios.  Also, DCTEncode
will not create files with Sum(HS*VS)>10 (regardless of the value of the
Relax parameter) because they violate the JPEG standard; but DCTDecode will
read such files.

The size of the execution stack cannot be changed dynamically.  (However,
the sizes of the operand and dictionary stacks can be changed.)

Separation color spaces are implemented, but devices that actually produce
color separations are not supported.  The special color separations All and
None, and the primary separations (Red, Green, etc.), are not supported.

execform and ucache are implemented, but they do not actually do any
caching; setucacheparams and ucachestatus are dummies.  (This only impacts
performance, not functionality.)

The image operator only honors the Interpolate flag in the image
dictionary if the combined transformation (ImageMatrix + CTM) doesn't
involve rotation, skewing, or X-reflection.

Some path building operations that would generate a device coordinate larger
than +/-2^19 will cause a limitcheck.  However, the common ones ([r]moveto,
[r]lineto, [r]curveto, closepath) will not.

Graphics bugs
-------------

The implementation only looks at the PaintType of the font when doing
show, not when doing charpath.  Because of this, stroked fonts don't work
correctly with charpath.

arcto gives an error for negative radii.

Opening more than one window device at the same time doesn't work.
This is the case for both X Windows and Microsoft Windows.

cshow doesn't work with composite fonts.

Non-graphics bugs
-----------------

The %statementedit pseudo-file is equivalent to %lineedit.  As a
consequence, the interactive interpreter requires that every statement fit
on a line, i.e., you can't have an unpaired (, {, or <.

The following operators that expect arrays won't accept packed arrays:
	definefont (Subrs (type 1 fonts))

Syntax errors occurring within a binary token do not produce the error
message specified by the Adobe documentation.

restore doesn't restore the user parameters.
