


User Commands                                             LOUT(1)



NAME
     lout - prepare Lout document for printing

SYNOPSIS
     lout [ options ] file...

DESCRIPTION
     Invoke the Basser Lout interpreter on the  concatenation  of
     the  named  files,  producing  a PostScript file on standard
     output suitable for printing on  PostScript  printers  using
     lpr(1).   If no files are named, stdin is used instead.  The
     special file name `-' may be used to denote standard  input.
     White space between flags and their associated option values
     is optional.

     An optional .lt suffix may  be  used  for  Lout  source  and
     include  files.   When  invoking files ending in this suffix
     the suffix may be omitted.

OPTIONS
  Output
     -o filename
          Direct output to filename instead of to stdout.

     -e filename
          Direct error messages to filename instead of to stderr.

     -a   Use "filename:linenum:colnum:message" alternative error
          message  format (useful with Emacs compilation mode and
          other tools).

  Output format
     -EPS Produce output in the  form  of  an  EPS  (Encapsulated
          PostScript)  file,  suitable  for  inclusion in another
          document.  Useful with stand-alone illustrations.

     -p   Produce plain text output instead of PostScript.

     -P   Like -p, but with a form-feed character between pages.

     -Z   Produce Adobe Portable Document  Format  (PDF)  output.
          This  includes  links,  but  the more advanced graphics
          packages of Lout are not supported.

     -PDF Synonym for -Z.

  Cross-reference database
     -s   Suppress all reading and writing of the cross reference
          database;  other  databases  are  not affected.  Useful
          when many simple documents  that  don't  do  any  cross
          referencing are stored in one directory.

     -l   Use ASCII order when sorting index  entries  etc.;  the
          default  depends on the COLLATE compilation option (use
          -V option to find out your default value).

     -L   Use your locale's  order  when  sorting  index  entries
          etc.;  the  default  depends on the COLLATE compilation
          option (use -V option to find out your default value).

  Execution of filters
     -S   Safe execution: disable all calls to system(3), instead
          echoing  the  commands  that  would have been executed.
          Although this makes the Lout run  certainly  safe,  the
          PostScript output file may not be.

     -U   Unsafe execution: allow calls to  system(3).   This  is
          usually  the  default  behavior,  but it is possible to
          make safe execution  the  default  during  installation
          (use  -V  option  to  find out whether this was done or
          not), hence the need for this flag.

  Changing document setup options
     --option{value}
          Set setup file option to value,  overriding  any  value
          assigned  to  option  in  the setup file.  For example,
          --@PageType{Letter} will set the @PageType  setup  file
          option to Letter.  The value may be a sequence of words
          but not an arbitrary Lout object.  If there are  spaces
          you  must  ensure that it is passed to Lout as a single
          option; the usual way to do this is to  enclose  it  in
          quotes.

  Searching for files
     -i filename
          Search the directories of the include  file  path  (see
          below)  for  filename  or  filename.lt  and include it.
          There may be multiple -i options.

     -I dirname
          Add dirname to the list  of  directories  searched  for
          @Include  files and -i option files.  There may be mul-
          tiple -I options.  @Include first searches the  current
          directory,  then  searches  the  -I  directories in the
          order given, and finally searches the  default  include
          file  directory  (see  below).   @SysInclude and the -i
          option omit the search of the current directory.

     -C dirname
          Add dirname to the list  of  directories  searched  for
          Lout character mapping (.LCM) files.  There may be mul-
          tiple -C options; the directories are searched  in  the
          order given, and finally the default character mappings
          directory is searched (see below).

     -F dirname
          Add dirname to the list  of  directories  searched  for
          font  metrics (formerly .AFM) files.  There may be mul-
          tiple -F options; the directories are searched  in  the
          order  given,  and  finally  the  default  font metrics
          directory is searched (see below).

     -H dirname
          Add dirname to the list  of  directories  searched  for
          hyphenation  patterns  files,  both  unpacked (.lh) and
          packed (.lp).  There may be multiple  -H  options;  the
          directories  are  searched  in  the  order  given,  and
          finally the default hyphenation directory  is  searched
          (see below).

     -D dirname
          Add dirname to the list  of  directories  searched  for
          Lout database files.  There may be multiple -D options.
          @Database searches the current directory, then  the  -D
          directories  in  the  order given, and finally searches
          the default databases directory (see below).  @SysData-
          base omits the search of the current directory.

  Miscellaneous options
     -x   Initializing run, not for ordinary use: read and  check
          all  font files mentioned in font definitions, read and
          check  all  hyphenation  files  mentioned  in  language
          definitions  and  build  compressed  versions, read and
          check all database files mentioned in database  clauses
          and build index files.

     -u   Print usage information on stderr and exit.

     -V   Print version information on stderr and exit.

     -M   Use less memory and run more slowly (the  cross  refer-
          ence  database index will be kept in a file rather than
          in memory).

     -w   Show the total number of non-empty words printed in the
          output  file.   This includes words and numbers in page
          headers and footers; section numbers and other numbers;
          every  punctuation  character  in a font different from
          its adjacent word; and every little fragment  of  every
          equation;  so  it will always somewhat overestimate the
          true number.

FILES AND ENVIRONMENT VARIABLE
     Default include file directory:   LOUTLIB/include
     Default databases directory:      LOUTLIB/data
     Default font metrics directory:   LOUTLIB/font
     Default hyphenation directory:    LOUTLIB/hyph
     Default character mappings dir.:  LOUTLIB/maps
     Default locales directory:        LOUTLIB/locale

     The default library directory, usually  /usr/local/lib/lout,
     can be changed by setting environment variable LOUTLIB to an
     alternative directory name.

SEE ALSO
     prg2lout(1), lpr(1), ghostview(1)

MAILING LIST
     A public mailing list for discussion  of  Lout  exists.   To
     subscribe,  mail lout-request@ptc.spbu.ru with the word sub-
     scribe in the Subject line.  To post an  item,  mail  it  to
     lout@ptc.spbu.ru.

REFERENCES
     Jeffrey H. Kingston, A User's Guide  to  the  Lout  Document
     Formatting  System,  and An Expert's Guide to the Lout Docu-
     ment Formatting System.

AUTHOR
     Jeffrey H. Kingston
